doc(tree): add quick start guide for using shared tree (#22375)
microsoft/FluidFramework: docs/content/docs/start/tree-start.md

---
title: SharedTree Quick Start
menuPosition: 2
codeCopyButton: true
aliases:
  - "/docs/get-started/tree-quick-start/"
  - "/start/tree-quick-start/"
  - "/docs/tree-start/"

---

> `SharedTree` is a [distributed data structure](../data-structures/overview.md) that looks and feels like simple JavaScript objects with a type safe wrapper.

Reviewer: It makes me really sad that this document on DDSs doesn't even mention tree as an option. We should probably fix that before we link to it. I did let @nmsimons know, and he filed an item to update our docs to recommend tree as the default pattern.

Author: I could just take that item, seems like a simple enough change. I feel like it's also fine to just link to it anyways since it doesn't really change the meaning of this doc at all

This guide will walk you through the basics of creating, configuring, and interacting with a `SharedTree` in your application. 

## Creating a Tree

A `SharedTree` can be created by defining a `ContainerSchema` with an initial object of type `SharedTree` and using this schema to create and load your container.
This example creates a container using an Azure specific client.

See more info on creating and loading containers [here](../build/containers.md#creating-a-container).

```
import { AzureClient } from "@fluidframework/azure-client";
import { ContainerSchema, SharedTree } from "fluid-framework";

// clientProps specifies connection details and is defined by the app author
const client = new AzureClient(clientProps);

const containerSchema: ContainerSchema = {
	initialObjects: {
		appData: SharedTree,
	},
};

const { container } = await client.createContainer(containerSchema, "2");
```

After creating a `SharedTree`, you need to create a `TreeView`.

> A `TreeView` provides the interface for reading and editing data on the `SharedTree`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `TreeView` provides the interface for reading and editing data on the `SharedTree` using a particular schema.
```

Reviewer: Later we can link to a schema specific document once we have it.

This is done by calling `viewWith` on the `SharedTree` with your tree configuration.

```
const treeConfiguration = new TreeViewConfiguration(
	{ schema: RootSchema }
)

const appData = container.initialObjects.appData.viewWith(
	treeConfiguration
);
```

The tree configuration takes in a schema for the root of the tree which will need to be defined by your application.

## Defining a Schema

A schema outlines the structure and types of data that your tree will manage.
Having a schema provides useful guarantees about the shape your data will take.

> It is also used to generate TypeScript types which means the structure of your data is analogous to JS data types for easy use in external libraries or systems.

Reviewer: nit: the generation of types is not what ensures the structure/usefulness and external systems, so you could rework this sentence and the one before it for more clarity

To define a schema, first create a `SchemaFactory` with a unique string to use as the namespace.

```
const schemaFactory = new SchemaFactory("some-schema-id-prob-a-uuid")
```

> `SchemaFactory` provides some methods for specifying internal nodes including `object()`, `array()`, and `map()`; and five primitive data types for specifying leaf nodes: `boolean`, `string`, `number`, `null`, and `handle`.

Reviewer: why the word "internal" here? also, you might consider 'collections' instead of 'nodes'. so, maybe '...for specifying collection types...'

See [schema definition](../data-structures/tree#schema-definition) for more info on the provided types.

> You can define a schema in customizable mode by extending the notional type object which also creates a TypeScript data type.

Reviewer: Mentioning customizable mode in passing without defining it is a bit confusing. I would probably not mention that this is a named mode and instead (at most) mention POJO mode as a brief aside.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define a schema in customizable mode by extending one of the built-in object types.
When you specify the structure of your schema type this way, the system also creates a TypeScript type for type-safe usage in your application.
```

	const unsubscribe = Tree.on(appData.root.items, "nodeChanged", () => {
		setCount(appData.root.items.length);
	});
	return unsubscribe;
}, []);
```

`nodeChanged` fires whenever one or more properties of the specified node change while `treeChanged` also fires whenever any node in its subtree changes.
See [the API](../api/v2/tree/treechangeevents-interface) docs for more details.

## Editing Tree Data

There are built-in editing methods for each of the provided schema types.
For example, if your data is in an array, you can add an item like this:

```
appData.root.items.insertAt(3);
```

The schema types can also be edited using the assignment operator like this:

```
appData.root.title = "chores";
```

Editing methods can also be defined on schema classes defined in customizable mode.
This allows you to write methods that are more suited to your app's specific needs.

```
class TodoList extends schemaFactory.object("TodoList", {
	title: schemaFactory.string,
	items: todoItems,
}) {
	public removeFirst = () => {
		if (this.length > 0) this.removeAt(0);
	};
}
```
\
See [schema definition](../data-structures/tree#schema-definition) for more details on the built-in editing methods.

> You can also read more about how these editing operations work in collaborative settings [here](https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/blob/main/packages/dds/tree/docs/main/merge-semantics.md).

Reviewer: I would add one additional sentence before this that highlights how these methods are designed to merge well in collaborative settings, unlike the local versions of those edits. I would still link to the doc for further reading, but it's good to emphasize the magic that is built-in.

### Grouping Edits into Transactions

Edits can be grouped into transaction using the `Tree.runTransaction()`	API.

> Using a transaction guarantees that (if applied) all of the changes will be applied together synchronously.

Reviewer: So, interestingly enough fluid already guarantees that all edits made in the same JavaScript turn will be applied synchronously so this is not a guarantee worth mentioning. The primary benefit to customers right now is the fact that transactions are the unit of undo redo. When we eventually expose branching, this will also have implications for how many commits show up in a branch (as transactions are essentially squashing) but for now, outside of undo/redo, the only other benefit is some poorly defined performance improvements of squashing that probably shouldn't be mentioned in this doc.

```
Tree.runTransaction(myNode, (node) => {
    // Make multiple changes to the tree.
    // This can be changes to the referenced node but is not limited to that scope.

    if (
        // Something is wrong here!
    ) return "rollback";
})
```

See more information on transactions [here](../data-structures/tree#transactions).

### Undoing and Redoing Edits

> Calling `revert` on a `Revertible` will revert its associated commit on the associated view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calling `revert` on a `Revertible` will revert the associated change on the associated view.
```

Reviewer: I wouldn't introduce the concept of a commit (though the event does use it...) if we don't have to. Save that for branching or, alternatively, briefly mention that ST models the underlying changes as a branch system with commits.
